"The Bitcoin Standard" by Saifedean Ammous, "The
Decentralized Alternative to Central Banking".
Hi and welcome to the BookLab, and today we're
going to talk about "The Bitcoin Standard" and
why this book might be a good starting point
for you if you're interested in Bitcoin as a
technology or just want to find out why the
current financial system feels so broken. To
bring you some context, I will first give you
a short history of Bitcoin and its adaptation,
which is pretty crazy actually. I will also talk
about why this technology matters and why it's
important to learn about it, and why this is a
good starting point for anyone who wants to learn
about this controversial, often misunderstood,
and possibly revolutionary technology.
But first, a disclaimer. In this video,
I talk exclusively about Bitcoin and not
crypto in general. Bitcoin is crypto,
but all crypto is not Bitcoin, and this is,
of course, not financial advice. Let's go.
On November 1st, 2008, a computer programmer under
the pseudonym of Satoshi Nakamoto sent out an
email to a cryptography mailing list announcing
that he had come up with an electronic cash
system that was fully peer-to-peer, that didn't
depend on a trusted third party. He had designed
a payment network with its own currency where
members could verify all transactions without
having to trust any single member of the network.
Members who spent their computer processing power
on verifying transactions were rewarded with the
currency. The new thing with this system compared
to other attempts was that it actually worked,
and this was the start of the Bitcoin saga.
2008: Satoshi Nakamoto publishes his white
paper, the first block is mined in 2009. Now
the Bitcoin system is up and running. Bitcoin
becomes a digital good in 2009 when an internet
exchange sold 5,50 Bitcoins for $52. This
was the first purchase of Bitcoin for money,
$1 for 1,06 Bitcoins. The price was calculated
by measuring the electricity needed to produce
a Bitcoin. It was no longer a digital game for
geeks, but it was a market good with a price. On
May 22, 2010, someone bought two pizzas for 10,000
Bitcoins. This was the first time Bitcoin was used
as a medium of exchange. In 2021, in order to
promote financial inclusion and job creation, El
Salvador became the first country to adopt Bitcoin
as legal tender. In January 2024, the spot Bitcoin
ETFs were approved in the US. Last week they were
approved in Hong Kong. This is important because
it gave legal clarity around Bitcoin because one
of the fears has always been that the governments
will ban Bitcoin and the technology. Now we have
legal clarity that Bitcoin is basically on equal
footing with gold and other commodities.
The ETFs are also a way for non-tech-savvy
people to buy Bitcoin because you can do it with
ease now through traditional financial services.
Why is Bitcoin important and what makes
it special and how does it improve on the
current financial systems? Well, one of the
things is that it's decentralized. No one
controls Bitcoin. The creator has vanished
and even if Satoshi Nakamoto would show up,
people would probably not believe it's him
because there are so many people that have
claimed to be him and they've been proven wrong
and it just wouldn't matter. And this is important
because there's no one that has disproportionate
influence over Bitcoin. There's no founder around,
there's no company that owns it, no country
that controls it. Basically, Bitcoin exists
and it doesn't give a [ __ ] about what anyone
thinks about it. It just does its thing. Having
a sovereign system like this that can't easily be
tinkered with, that has fully transparent code,
that can't be stopped or banned, is very powerful,
and the author argues that this solves a big
problem in our current financial system, which
is that governments keep on printing money,
debasing the value of the dollar, the yen, the
euros, that you work so hard for. We used to have
a system where governments commonly backed their
currencies with gold or other currencies that are
backed by gold, the idea that the dollar value
corresponded with a set amount of gold that was
held by the banks. Having your currency backed by
gold is, of course, inconvenient for governments
because gold is scarce, it's hard to get it out of
the ground, it takes a lot of energy. But that's
what you have to do if you want to fund a new
government program or maybe you want to go to
war. It's either finding more gold or tax your
citizens more. But this problem was solved in
1971 when the dollar went off the gold standard.
Now governments could print as much money as they
wanted without getting any more gold in their
coffers. So this was great for governments but
not great for the citizens because it results
in inflation and loss of purchasing power and
we noticed this all around the world today. This
is a very popular practice and I noticed it here
in Sweden because it feels like you have to run
faster just to stay in place because if you want
to save up for a house, the house prices go up
faster than you can ever save your money. Having
money that could be printed infinitely is not a
sustainable economic system. It has been tried
before throughout history and the book goes into
all of the cases where people have manipulated the
amount of precious metals in coins and whatever
and it always ends up in disaster. And this is
where Bitcoin comes in and the author argues
because there was only a set amount of Bitcoin.
I can't go through really all aspects
of Bitcoin in this review, but I will
highlight some key concepts that really blew
my mind or fascinated me. So let's talk some
more about scarcity. Things in the world are
very seldom scarce. Not even gold is scarce,
really. There's tons more of it in the ground and
if the price of gold would go up, people would go
out and get it and with more technology, we would
have better precision at finding all the gold
that there is. Digital things are very seldom
scarce, therefore not very valuable. I mean,
it's easier than to copy something on a computer
and make copies of it that would be identical.
And that's a remarkable thing with Satoshi
Nakamoto because he invented digital scarcity
for a commodity. This has never happened before,
never. Not in the digital world and not even in
the physical world. It is impossible to mine more
than 21 million Bitcoins. There are currently more
to be mined but there will never be more than
21 million. One might ask, 21 million, that's
not enough to build a new economic system on?
Well, Bitcoin has another property of money, it's
divisible. Each Bitcoin is made up of 100 million
Satoshis allowing us to do micro-payments and buy
a coffee with Bitcoin. Actually, when I did my
deep dive into Bitcoin while reading this one,
I actually used the Lightning Network, which is a
layer 2 technology used to send micro-transactions
like fractions of a cent to people all around
the world and that seems to work pretty well.
Another interesting aspect of Bitcoin is
the trustless and permissionless nature
of the technology. Imagine you would like
to send $10 to a random person in Nigeria,
chances are that you wouldn't be able
to or the fees would be too high or you
have to jump through a bunch of hoops that
would render the effort pointless. Anyone
with a Bitcoin wallet can receive and
send Bitcoin. Crooks and criminals, yes
, they can and critics love to point that
out but there's also other people that can
be empowered by this technology. So many people
are excluded from the financial system. I mean,
there's a lot of women that are not allowed
to have their own financial means in some
countries. They could with Bitcoin without
having to ask for permission. Same goes for
people in very remote villages that might not
have internet or access to banks. With Bitcoin,
you can receive money through SMS. Why is this
remarkable? Because that means that you don't
even have to have an internet provider in order
to do business in Bitcoin. You only need a cell
phone and a signal and there's actually more cell
phones in the world than there are people with
bank accounts. There's so many opportunities for
new market and I just find that idea mind-blowing.
This book is fascinating in so many ways. Not
only do we get a history of money every from we
started using shells to stones to precious
metals to fiat, it also gives us a history
of Bitcoin as a technology and it's a punk-ass
story. It's really entertaining. It also breaks
down the technology itself in detail and you
need to understand how Bitcoin work in order to
appreciate it fully. You need to know how mining
works, what proof of work is, what is hash rate,
what is the difficulty adjustment and what is the
Bitcoin halving. It happens around probably the
day I published this video actually and this is
an event that happens every four years where the
reward miners get for using their computers
to solve this puzzle is cut in half which
lowers the inflow of Bitcoin into the market.
The book also talks about the psychological
impact inflation has on people. It talks about
Keynesian versus Austrian economics and those kind
of philosophical aspects of money. There's just
so much in this book you might be forever sorry if
you don't make an informed decision about Bitcoin.
It's super easy to discard it and most people
do because of all the weird scams and crypto
things that are going on on the surface. But
I'm yet to hear about someone who actually read
up on the technology, fully understood it, and
stayed critical. You need to spend 10 to 100 hours
studying Bitcoin in order to understand it, not
because it's complicated in any way, it's actually
pretty simple, but because it's different. We have
never had a finite fungible asset before in the
world either digital or physical. How is it that
no one can control Bitcoin, how is it that it's
fully transparent and why isn't it being hacked?
You need to understand and be able to answer
all these questions before you can decide if
it is a big ponzi scheme which it might be or if
it's the biggest invention since the internet. I
urge everyone to do some research about it so
you can make up your mind and reading about it
in "The Bitcoin Standard" is an entertaining
and good way to find out and poke around.
I listened to this book as an audiobook and
that edition was slightly older than this one
and it was actually fun to read that old edition
because I could take what it was said in that book
and kind of verify it on what's happening today
a few years later just to see if the ideas held
up. I recommend this book even if you don't care
too much about Bitcoin because it's just a great
book that would help you think critically and
think in new ways about money and that's always
a good thing to do. "The Bitcoin Standard," this
is a book that probably will end up on my top list
for this year because for me, this was one of the
best reading experiences in a long time and so
was this book, "A Million Wicked Thoughts." It's
been a slow run because I only had the physical
copy and I haven't had too much time to sit down
with physical copies recently. "What the Internet
Tells Us About Sexual Relationships," "A Billion
Wicked Thoughts." This book, if you're interested
in human psychology and you want to see some of
the more shady sides of human psychology than
this book is for you. I'll put a review up as soon
as I can. Have a great week everyone, let me know
what you read in the comments, subscribe if you
like the content and I'll be back with more videos
soon. Next month I will publish my rundown, my
curated version of the releases for May. All the
top non-fiction releases will be on that list so
check that out next week. Until then, Bjorn out!